[Update 8] Add Ballerina Profiler learn page (#7735)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/development-tutorials/test-document-the-code/ballerina-profiler.md

---
title: Ballerina Profiler

> description: Check out how you can run and do a CPU profile of a Ballerina program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Check out how you can run and do a CPU profile of a Ballerina program.
```
What is meant by "doing" a CPU profile?

Author: Will remove that and just say profile a Ballerina program.

keywords: ballerina runtime, troubleshoot, profiler, CPU profile, flame graph
permalink: /learn/ballerina-profiler/
active: ballerina-profiler
---

> Improvements in your Ballerina code might be required to increase its runtime performance, minimize code execution times, increase throughput, and reduce latency. To do that, we need to identify performance bottlenecks, implications of concurrent executions, and find which code segments take longer to execute, and areas to improve performance. This can be done by using a profiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Improvements in your Ballerina code might be required to increase its runtime performance, minimize code execution times, increase throughput, and reduce latency. To do that, you need to identify performance bottlenecks, implications of concurrent executions, which code segments take longer to execute, and areas to improve performance. This can be done by using a profiler.
```

> Ballerina Profiler is a tool that monitors Ballerina runtime and its operations such as function calls. It can be used to understand the behavior and troubleshoot the performance issues of a Ballerina program and optimize it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina Profiler is a tool that monitors the Ballerina runtime and its operations such as function calls. It can be used to understand the behavior and troubleshoot the performance issues of a Ballerina program and optimize it.
```

> >**Note:** Ballerina Profiler is an experimental feature, which supports only a limited set of functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note:** Ballerina Profiler is an experimental feature, which supports only a limited set of functionality.
```
Should we mention that "and will be enhanced in future releases? Check the standard note we previously added for experimental features for persistence etc.)

Author: Checked https://ballerina.io/downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.5.0#persist-tool. @warunalakshitha do we need to also say `The commands associated with the tool might change in future releases.`?

## Features

> - Profiles a local session of a Ballerina program through offline instrumentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Profile a local session of a Ballerina program through offline instrumentation.
```

> - CPU profiling which finds out where the CPU time is going.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Perform CPU profiling, which finds out where the CPU time is going.
```

> - Generating a flame graph which shows the function call stack and the execution times of each function call. It provides an interface for viewing runtime performance and the ability to search, diagnose, and find performance bottlenecks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Generate a flame graph, which shows the function call stack and the execution times of each function call. It provides an interface for viewing runtime performance and the ability to search, diagnose, and find performance bottlenecks.
```

>**Note:** Profiling is a high-powered activity with a heavy overhead and can slow down your application.

## Profile a Ballerina program

To profile a Ballerina package, you can use the `bal profile` CLI command inside the root directory of the Ballerina package.

For example, create a Ballerina package named `sort` using the `bal new` CLI command.

```
$ bal new sort 
```

> Go to the root directory of the Ballerina package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the root directory of the Ballerina package.
```
Shall we make the steps numbered bullet points?

    int[] arr = check createRandomIntArray(check float:pow(10, 2).cloneWithType(int));
    int[] sortedArr = bubbleSort(arr);
    boolean isSorted = isSortedArray(sortedArr);
    io:println("Is the array sorted? " + isSorted.toString());
}

public isolated function bubbleSort(int[] arr) returns int[] {
    int n = arr.length();
    int temp = 0;
    boolean swapped = false;
    foreach int i in 0 ... n - 2 {
        foreach int j in 1 ... n - 1 - i {
            if (arr[j - 1] > arr[j]) {
                temp = arr[j - 1];
                arr[j - 1] = arr[j];
                arr[j] = temp;
                swapped = true;
            }
        }
        if (!swapped) {
            break;
        }
    }
    return arr;
}

isolated function isSortedArray(int[] sortedArr) returns boolean {
    foreach int i in 0 ..< sortedArr.length() - 1 {
        if (sortedArr[i] > sortedArr[i + 1]) {
            return false;
        }
    }
    return true;
}

isolated function createRandomIntArray(int size) returns int[]|error {
    int[] array = [];
    foreach int i in 0 ..< size {
        array.push(check random:createIntInRange(0, int:MAX_VALUE));
    }
    return array;
}
```

> Run and profile the Ballerina package using the `bal profile` CLI command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run and profile the Ballerina package using the `bal profile` CLI command.
```
If this is another CLI tool, this should belong to the set of tool pages. Check the format we have followed in them.

Author: This is not an integration tool. I discussed with my team to add a separate card saying `Troubleshoot the runtime` under development tutorials, and add the `Ballerina profiler` and `Strand dump tool` there.

Author: Edited the below card like this.
<img width="428" alt="image" src="https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/assets/33286289/4915f577-bcfd-43df-8f1d-31cb975ce5af">
Added the below card as follows.
<img width="938" alt="image" src="https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/assets/33286289/5d9d0825-5e68-4dbc-b1c2-0919ea86a5f1">

```

> $ bal profile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ bal profile
```
Would be better to give the complete usage of the command with the available command options at the top.

Author: This is the complete command the user needs to know.

```

> This will give the following output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You view the output below.
```

```
Compiling source
        profiler_demo/sort:0.1.0

Generating executable
        target/bin/sort.jar

================================================================================
Ballerina Profiler: Profiling...
================================================================================
Note: This is an experimental feature, which supports only a limited set of functionality.
[1/6] Initializing...
[2/6] Copying executable...
[3/6] Performing analysis...
[4/6] Instrumenting functions...
 ○ Instrumented module count: 31
 ○ Instrumented function count: 1016
[5/6] Running executable...
Is the array sorted? true
[6/6] Generating output...
 ○ Execution time: 3 seconds 
 ○ Output: target/bin/ProfilerOutput.html
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

Open the `target/bin/ProfilerOutput.html` file using a web browser window to examine the Ballerina Profiler output to find the slow-running functions and performance bottlenecks, which can then be addressed to improve the program’s overall performance.

> ## Profiler output and available details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Profiler output and available details
```
Better to first introduce the available graph types.

Author: Only a single graph type is available. Will add a line to introduce that.

![Profiler output](/learn/images/profiler-output.png "Profiler output")

> The flame graph generated by the Ballerina Profiler contains the following details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The flame graph generated by the Ballerina Profiler contains the following details.
```
Shall we have sub headings for each graph type?

Author: Marking this as resolved since we only have one graph type.

1. Function call stack

2. Time taken to execute each function and its percentage

> Flame graph also has the following features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flame graph also has the following features.
```
Do the steps below demonstrate one feature or multiple?

Author: Multiple features: numbered as 1 2 3 4

1. Search a function.

![Search function inside flame graph](/learn/images/search-function-inside-flame-graph.png "Search function inside flame graph")

2. Clear the search.

3. Click on a function call and zoom the view.

![Click function and zoom flame graph](/learn/images/click-function-and-zoom-flame-graph.png "Click function and zoom flame graph")

4. Reset the view.

## Examine the output and find performance bottlenecks

> When we observe the flame graph generated by the Ballerina Profile for the above code, we can see the `bubbleSort` function has taken the most time to execute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we observe the flame graph generated by the Ballerina Profile for the above code, we can see the `bubbleSort` function has taken the most time to execute.
```
use the word `you` instead of `we`. Normally, we should use first-person pronouns to have active voice in technical documentation.

![Bubble sort function time](/learn/images/bubble-sort-function-time.png "Bubble sort function time")

Let's try to optimize the sorting function to increase the performance of our Ballerina application.

## Optimize the Ballerina code

> In this example, we will use another sorting algorithm to reduce the time taken to execute our application. Let’s replace the `main.bal` file with the code below which uses the merge sort algorithm instead of the bubble sort algorithm for sorting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, you will use another sorting algorithm to reduce the time taken to execute your application. Replace the `main.bal` file with the code below, which uses the `merge sort` algorithm instead of the `bubble sort` algorithm for sorting.
```

Author: Since bubble sort and merge sort is just a name not a code snippet here will not add **`** as done here https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merge_sort.

    return population >= 100 && deaths >= 10;
}

isolated function hasNonZeroPopulation(int population, int deaths) returns boolean {
    return population >= 0 && deaths >= 0;
}

isolated function getKey(record {|string country; string continent; int population; decimal caseFatalityRatio;|} recordVal) returns string {
    return recordVal.country;
}
```

Run the CLI command `bal profile` in the root directory to run the Ballerina package and profile it. This will run the service while profiling it.

```
$ bal profile
Compiling source
        profiler_demo/covid19_stats:0.1.0

Generating executable
        target/bin/covid19_stats.jar

================================================================================
Ballerina Profiler: Profiling...
================================================================================
Note: This is an experimental feature, which supports only a limited set of functionality.
[1/6] Initializing...
[2/6] Copying executable...
[3/6] Performing analysis...
[4/6] Instrumenting functions...
 ○ Instrumented module count: 44
 ○ Instrumented function count: 2935
[5/6] Running executable...
```

> Send 10 requests to each resource endpoint using the `curl` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Send 10 requests to each resource endpoint using the `curl` command.
```
All steps should be numbered bullet points.

```
$ curl localhost:8080/covid19/countries/names
```

```
$ curl localhost:8080/covid19/countries/summary
```

> Stop the service by sending the `SIGINT` signal to the Ballerina program. We can use `Ctrl+C` in the service running terminal to send the signal to it. This will stop both the Ballerina program and profiling it and will generate the profiler output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stop the service by sending the `SIGINT` signal to the Ballerina program. You can use `Ctrl+C` in the service running terminal to send the signal to it. This will stop both the Ballerina program and profiling it and will generate the profiler output.
```

```
[6/6] Generating output...
 ○ Execution time: 58 seconds 
 ○ Output: target/bin/ProfilerOutput.html
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

> By observing the flame graph we can see that the `get summary` resource function takes more time than the `get names` resource function. We can use the profiler output data to improve the performance of our Ballerina service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By observing the flame graph, you can see that the `get summary` resource function takes more time than the `get names` resource function. You can use the profiler output data to improve the performance of your Ballerina service.
```

> ![Profiler output of a Ballerina service](/learn/images/ballerina-service-profiler-output.png "Profiler output of a Ballerina service")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Profiler output of a Ballerina service](/learn/images/ballerina-service-profiler-output.png "Profiler output of a Ballerina service")
```
if the page is too long, maybe, we can separate the example out to a new sub page.
